=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
September 2022
Adult
Learners
Global
   Scale
 of English
   Learning 
 Objectives

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
Students often complain about their 
lack of perceived progress and will 
welcome the opportunity to work 
towards certain, defined objectives.”
Barbara Gardner,  
Learning Technologies Training Coordinator, 
Study Group
All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise without prior written permission of the Publishers.
©Pearson Education Limited 2022 
© The copyright of the descriptive scales and the illustrative scales (in all languages) reproduced in this document belongs to the Council of Europe.
All users and publishers must ask formal and written permission prior to using these by writing to the Language Policy Unit of the Council of Europe (language.policy@coe.int)

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
3
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
Global Scale of English Learning Objectives:  
making learning more effective
This document introduces the Global Scale of English (GSE) Learning Objectives for Adult Learners. These 
Learning Objectives have been developed by Pearson English over a number of years in collaboration 
with teachers, ELT authors and language experts from around the world. They form the backbone of our 
mission to ensure that our products and services have a positive and measurable impact on learners’ lives.
In order to learn English as effectively and efficiently as possible, a learner needs to know  
three things:
	•
What level is my English?
	•
Am I making progress?
	•
What should I aim to learn next to meet my long-term goals?
To answer these three questions, learners and teachers need the following as part of an overall English 
learning ecosystem:
	•
A clear and precise definition of what it means to be at a particular ‘level’ of proficiency
	•
English teaching and learning materials which are aligned to the ‘level’ definitions
	•
An assessment tool designed to profile a learner’s proficiency across all four skills: reading, writing, 
speaking and listening
The Global Scale of English represents the most significant 
advance in performance-based approaches to language 
learning, teaching and assessment since the development of 
the Common European Framework of Reference.” 
David Nunan Ph.D., Professor Emeritus of Applied Linguistics, University of Hong Kong 
The GSE Learning Objectives form part of the first point above: providing an accurate definition of what it 
means to be at a particular ‘level’ on a scale of English language proficiency. 
Five sets of GSE Learning Objectives have been developed to meet the needs of specific audiences:  
Pre-Primary (aged under 6 years old), Young Learners (6-14), General Adult Learners, learners of 
Academic English and Professional English. 
For more information about our work in this field, please visit pearsonenglish.com/gse.

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
4
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
The Global Scale of English
The Global Scale of English (GSE) is a standardised, granular scale which measures English language 
proficiency. Unlike some other frameworks which describe attainment in broad bands, the Global Scale of 
English identifies what a learner can do at each point on the scale across speaking, listening, reading and 
writing skills. 
The scale is designed to motivate learners by giving more granular insight into learning progress. Using 
the Global Scale of English, teachers can match a student to the right course materials to suit their exact 
level and learning goals.
The Global Scale of English serves as a standard against which English language courses and 
assessments worldwide can be benchmarked, offering a truly global and shared understanding of 
proficiency levels.
Visit pearsonenglish.com/gse to learn more.
What it means to be at a level 
Learning a language is not like learning mathematics or electrical engineering, where each topic builds 
upon a previous one in a sequence. Language learning is not necessarily sequential, and a learner might 
be strong in one area, where they have had a lot of practice or a particular need or motivation, but quite 
weak in another. 
For that reason, to say that a learner is ‘at’ a certain level on the Global Scale of English does not mean 
they have necessarily mastered every GSE Learning Objective for every skill up to that point. Neither 
does it mean that they have mastered none at a higher GSE value. If a student is assessed as being at 61 
on the scale, it means s/he has a 50% probability of being able to perform GSE Learning Objectives at 
that level, a greater probability of being able to perform GSE Learning Objectives at a lower level, and a 
lower probability of being able to perform GSE Learning Objectives at a higher level. Language learning is 
unique to every individual. 
10
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
20
30
40
50
GSE Diﬃculty Level
Probability of Correct Perormance
60
70
80
90
A learner at 25 on GSE
10
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
20
30
40
50
GSE Diﬃculty Level
Probability of Correct Perormance
60
70
80
90
A learner at 61 on GSE

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
5
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
Extending the Common European Framework of 
Reference for Languages
The work to develop the GSE Learning Objectives builds upon the research carried out by Brian North and 
the Council of Europe in creating the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR)1.
The Global Scale of English itself has been psychometrically aligned to the CEFR.
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Global Scale of English
A1
+
+
+
CEFR 
B1  
B2  
C1
C2
A2 
<A1  
The CEFR uses a six-level classification of learner proficiency from A1 (low basic) to C2 (fully proficient). 
The amount of instruction needed to progress learners from one level to the next varies widely according 
to level, context, native language, age, ability, and other factors, so it is difficult to quantify exactly. 
However, it has been observed that most people studying for three or four hours per week (as is the case 
for the majority of adult learners) may take two or more years to move from one CEFR level to the next – 
and as proficiency increases, it takes even longer to move to the next CEFR level. When learners spend 
two or more years studying without reaching a new CEFR level, it can leave them feeling that they are 
making little or no progress.
In developing the GSE Learning Objectives, we have extended the number and range of learning 
objectives – or ‘Can Do Statements’ – that are included in the CEFR, providing information to support a far 
more granular definition of language proficiency. Students are much more motivated when they can see 
every small step in their progression.
+
+
+
Personalised Progress
Learning
Objectives
Proficiency  
Scale
Course 
Material
Assessment and 
Certification
For teachers, assessment specialists and content developers, the GSE ecosystem provides a detailed 
picture of language performance at different levels of proficiency and for individual skills. By combining 
course materials with assessment tools that are aligned to the Global Scale of English, teachers can:
	•
understand their students’ levels of proficiency more precisely
	•
monitor students’ progress at a granular level 
	•
make more informed choices for each student or class
1	
These learning objectives extend and build on the principles of the Common European Framework of Reference 
for Languages (CEFR) in their intended use “…[for]…the planning of language learning programmes in terms of their 
assumptions regarding prior knowledge, …their objectives, [and] their content” (Council of Europe, 2001, p6). Like 
CEFR, the GSE Learning Objectives are also intended for use in “the planning of language certification in terms of the 
content syllabus of examinations [and] assessment criteria, in terms of positive achievement.” (ibid)	

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
6
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
Informing teaching and assessment materials
Authors, editors and teachers are increasingly aware of the need to be learner-focused and to create 
syllabuses and courses that reflect learner needs and expectations. The GSE Learning Objectives 
constitute a detailed and graded model of student target performance across a range of skills and 
domains.
Our authors and editors are using the GSE Learning Objectives as the starting point for the creation of all 
new teaching and learning materials. The following example from SpeakOut illustrates how the authors 
have developed content to support the GSE Learning Objective for Speaking:
35
Can describe a travel experience with a few very basic stock phrases. (P)
In the lesson, learners engage with a series of staged activities designed to support and guide them 
towards being able to describe a travel experience of their own.   
	•
Speaking and vocabulary activities check learners’ language knowledge and pre-teach key travel 
vocabulary, working with images and text
	•
Controlled writing provides practice of travel vocabulary in context 
	•
Pre-reading prediction prepares learners for the reading passage describing a travel experience
	•
Follow-up activities raise awareness of key phrases used to describe a travel experience 
	•
Speaking activities enable practice in a controlled context
	•
As a final activity, learners work in groups and prepare to describe a travel experience of their own, 
which they then present to the class   
By the end of the lesson, learners have received the input required (skills, structures, vocabulary) and 
demonstrated their ability to perform the Learning Objective.
Many Pearson English courses for adult and young adult learners, such as Speakout, Roadmap, and 
Connectivity are aligned to the Global Scale of English. You will find information on the back cover of the 
Student’s Book that indicates the GSE range covered by each stage of a course:
Advanced
Upper Intermediate
Intermediate
Pre-Intermediate
Elementary
Star er
CEFR
Learn more about the Global Scale of English at pearsonenglish.com/gse
10
Global Scale of English
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
<A1
A2
A2+
B1+
B2
B2+
C1
C2
B1
A1
The above chart indicates the target range on the Global Scale of English (and the CEFR).  
This indicates the range of GSE Learning Objectives that authors have written to for that level.
Assessment tools have also been created to report on the Global Scale of English. From benchmarking 
learners’ progress to certifying their skills, teachers and learners can understand development in all four 
language skills with GSE-based insights. 
To learn more about assessments, go to pearsonenglish.com/assessment.

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
7
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
GSE and the CEFR Levels
In the following we define how the Global Scale of English is related to the CEFR levels. To give an 
impression of what the levels mean, i.e., what learners at particular levels can do, we use the summary 
descriptors published as Table 1 in the CEFR (Council of Europe, 2001, p. 24).  
GSE 10–21 (Below A1): Global assessment
The range on the Global Scale of English from 10 to 21 covers the area of measurable proficiency below 
the A1 level of the CEFR.  
It includes the level which North (2000, p. 295) characterises as ‘Tourist’, corresponding to a range of 13-21 
on the GSE, and a still lower ability which North (ibid.) labels ‘Smattering’. Neither of these was included 
in the original CEFR publication, because A1 was “considered the lowest level of generative language 
use” (Council of Europe, 2001, p. 33) and ‘Tourist’ and ‘Smattering’ rely “purely on a very finite rehearsed, 
lexically organised repertoire of situation-specific phrases” (ibid.). 
As part of the CEFR Companion Volume (2017), however, a new lower level of pre-A1 was added to the 
CEFR in acknowledgment of the importance of the lower levels as evidenced by a number of other 
descriptor projects, including the Global Scale of English.
Pre-A1 represents a ‘milestone’ half way towards Level A1, a band of proficiency at which the learner  has 
not yet acquired a generative capacity, but relies upon a repertoire of words and formulaic expressions. 
(Council of Europe, 2018, p. 46)
GSE 22–29 (A1): Global assessment
The capabilities of learners at Level A1 have been summarised in the CEFR as follows:
Can understand and use familiar everyday expressions and very basic phrases aimed at the satisfaction 
of needs of a concrete type. Can introduce him/herself and others and can ask and answer questions 
about personal details such as where he/she lives, people he/she knows and things he/she has. Can 
interact in a simple way provided the other person talks slowly and clearly and is prepared to help 
(Council of Europe, 2001, Table 1, p. 24). 
GSE 30-35 (A2) and 36-42 (A2+): Global assessment
The capabilities of learners at Level A2 have been summarised in the CEFR as follows:
Can understand sentences and frequently used expressions related to areas of most immediate 
relevance (e.g. very basic personal and family information, shopping, local geography, employment). 
Can communicate in simple and routine tasks requiring a simple and direct exchange of information on 
familiar and routine matters. Can describe in simple terms aspects of his/her background, immediate 
environment and matters in areas of immediate need (Council of Europe, 2001, Table 1, p. 24).
GSE 43–50 (B1) and 51-58 (B1+): Global assessment
The capabilities of learners at Level B1 have been summarised in the CEFR.as follows:
Can understand the main points of clear standard input on familiar matters regularly encountered in 
work, school, leisure, etc. Can deal with most situations likely to arise whilst travelling in an area where 
the language is spoken. Can produce simple connected text on topics which are familiar or of personal 
interest. Can describe experiences and events, dreams, hopes and ambitions and briefly give reasons 
and explanations for opinions and plans (Council of Europe, 2001, Table 1, p. 24).

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
8
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
GSE 59-66 (B2) and 67-75 (B2+): Global assessment
The capabilities of learners at Level B2 have been summarised in the CEFR as follows:
Can understand the main ideas of complex text on both concrete and abstract topics, including 
technical discussions in his/her field of specialisation. Can interact with a degree of fluency and 
spontaneity that makes regular interaction with native speakers quite possible without strain for either 
party. Can produce clear, detailed text on a wide range of subjects and explain a viewpoint on a topical 
issue giving the advantages and disadvantages of various options (Council of Europe, 2001, Table 1, p. 24).
GSE 76–84 (C1): Global assessment
The capabilities of learners at Level C1 have been summarised in the CEFR as follows:
Can understand a wide range of demanding, longer texts, and recognise implicit meaning.  
Can express him/herself fluently and spontaneously without much obvious searching for expressions. 
Can use language flexibly and effectively for social, academic and professional purposes. Can produce 
clear, well-structured, detailed text on complex subjects, showing  
controlled use of organisational patterns, connectors and cohesive devices (Council of Europe, 2001, 
Table 1, p. 24).
GSE 85-90 (C2): Global assessment
The capabilities of learners at Level C2 have been summarised in the CEFR as follows:
Can understand with ease virtually everything heard or read. Can summarise information from different 
spoken and written sources, reconstructing arguments and accounts in a coherent presentation. Can 
express him/herself spontaneously, very fluently and precisely, differentiating finer shades of meaning 
even in more complex situations (Council of Europe, 2001, Table 1, p. 24).
We have also developed the GSE Assessment Framework for Adult Learners, intended to be used by 
alongside the Learning Objectives for Adult Learners. For more information visit pearsonenglish.com/gse.
Sources and origins of the Learning Objectives
Many of the communicative descriptors contained in the Learning Objectives either come from the 
original CEFR document (Council of Europe, 2001) or are slightly modified versions of these. We have 
created the additional descriptors by consulting a variety of sources, including:
	•
The Council of Europe’s Breakthrough specification (Trim, 2009) 
	•
The EAQUALS/British Council Core Inventory (British Council/EAQUALS, 2010)
	•
British and American English course materials 
	•
Syllabuses from various Ministries of Education. 
The GSE Learning Objectives are coded for purposes of copyright and to show their origin:
(C) 	
Common European Framework descriptor, verbatim, © Council of Europe 
(Ca) 	
Common European Framework descriptor, adapted or edited, © Council of Europe 
(CJa)	
CEFR-J descriptor, adapted or edited1 
(CSEa) 	
Eiken descriptor from the CSE, adapted or edited. CSE is the C40ommon Scale for  
	
English developed by the Eiken foundation of Japan 
(N2000)	
North (2000) descriptor, verbatim 
(N2000a)	
North (2000) descriptor, adapted or edited 
(N2007a)	
North (2007) expanded set of C1 and C2 descriptors, adapted or edited 
(P) 	
New Pearson descriptor 
(Wa) 	
WIDA ELD Standards, adapted or edited
1	
The CEFR-J is an adapted version of the CEFR for English language teaching in Japan (Project leader: Professor 
Yukio Tono, Tokyo University of Foreign Studies). For the GSE project, the English version of the CEFR-J Version 1 (March, 
2012) was used and each descriptor was adjusted to fit the Pearson style of descriptors.

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
9
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
GSE Learning Objectives
Reading
GSE 10–21/Below A1: Reading
10
Can recognise the letters of the alphabet. (P)
Can recognise cardinal numbers up to 10. (P)
12
Can read and understand simple prices. (P)
14
Can identify very common food and drink on a menu. (P)
Can recognise basic plural forms of nouns (e.g. ‘cars’, ‘books’). (P)
15
Can recognise familiar names, words and very basic phrases on simple notices. (Ca)
18
Can understand basic sentences introducing someone (e.g. ‘name’, ‘age’). (P)
GSE 22–29/A1: Reading
22
Can recognise cardinal numbers from 11-100. (P)
23
Can understand basic sentences describing everyday objects (e.g. ‘colour’, ‘size’), given visual support. (P)
25
Can understand short, simple descriptions of objects, people and animals, given visual support. (P)
26
Can follow short, simple written directions (e.g. ‘to go from X to Y’). (C)
27
Can understand short written notices, signs and instructions with visual support. (P)
Can understand simple descriptions of places. (P)
Can understand basic phrases in short, simple texts. (P)
28
Can follow basic instructions for making something simple. (P)
Can extract personal details in a limited way. (P)
Can understand short, simple messages about when and where to meet. (P)
29
Can understand familiar phrases in a simple text. (P)
Can understand simple phrases related to familiar, everyday activities. (P)
Can follow simple instructions to carry out a straightforward task. (P)
Can understand basic factual statements relating to pictures or simple texts. (P)
GSE 30–35/A2: Reading
30
Can understand simple safety instructions, with visual support. (P)
Can understand simple descriptions of people’s physical appearance. (P)
Can understand short, simple texts about everyday activities. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
10
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
31
Can understand short, simple messages on postcards, emails and social networks. (Ca)
Can extract specific information (e.g. ‘facts and numbers’) from simple informational texts related to 
everyday life (e.g. ‘posters’, ‘leaflets’). (P)
Can follow basic instructions on how to play a simple board game, if supported by pictures. (P)
Can find specific, predictable information in everyday materials (e.g. ‘menus’, ‘timetables’). (Ca)
Can understand simple questions in questionnaires on familiar topics. (P)
32
Can identify basic personal details about someone on website profiles, business cards etc. (P)
Can get the gist of short, simple narratives, with visual support. (P)
34
Can understand the general meaning of short, simple informational material and descriptions if there is 
visual support. (Ca)
Can understand simple instructions on everyday equipment (e.g. ‘cash machines’). (Ca)
35
Can read a simple text and extract factual details. (P)
Can identify key information in short, simple factual texts from the headings and pictures. (P)
Can follow a simple series of written instructions to carry out a task. (P)
Can identify basic biographical information in short simple texts about other people. (P)
GSE 36–42/A2(+): Reading
36
Can follow a basic sequence of events in a simple text on a familiar topic. (P)
37
Can understand short, simple personal emails and letters. (Ca)
Can understand short, simple narrative texts. (CSEa)
Can understand rules and regulations (e.g. ‘safety’) if expressed in simple language. (C)
Can identify specific information in simple letters, brochures and short articles. (Ca)
Can understand reports of travel delays and cancellations. (P)
38
Can make basic inferences from simple information in a short text. (P)
Can understand basic opinions expressed in simple language in short texts. (P)
Can identify basic similarities and differences in the facts between two short simple texts on the same 
familiar topic, if supported by pictures and questions. (P)
39
Can understand short, simple narratives and biographies. (CJa)
Can understand the instructions to buy tickets online. (P)
Can identify specific information in a simple factual text. (P)
Can understand simple factual titles and headlines relating to common events. (P)
Can understand a simple text about a past event. (P)
40
Can scan a simple text, identifying the main topic(s). (P)
Can understand simple details in informational texts  (blogs, websites, catalogues,  etc.). (P)
41
Can follow the sequence of actions or events in a text on a familiar everyday topic. (P)
42
Can understand a simple form asking for medical information (P)
Can understand the main information from simple diagrams (e.g. ‘graphs’, ‘bar charts’). (P)

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
11
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
GSE 43–50/B1: Reading
43
Can make basic inferences or predictions about text content from headings, titles or headlines. (P)
Can understand simple technical information (e.g. ‘instructions for everyday equipment’). (Ca)
44
Can identify similarities and differences between two short texts. (P)
Can scan short texts to locate specific information. (P)
Can search the internet for specific everyday or work-related information. (P)
Can understand written instructions for taking medication. (P)
45
Can find and understand information in advertisements for sporting or cultural events. (P)
Can understand information in advertisements for jobs and services. (P)
Can skim a short text to identify its main purpose. (P)
Can identify key subject vocabulary in written descriptions. (Wa)
46
Can generally understand straightforward factual texts on familiar topics. (Ca)
Can derive the probable meaning of simple unknown words from short, familiar contexts. (Ca)
Can understand basic types of standard letters and emails on familiar topics (e.g. ‘enquiries’, 
‘complaints’). (Ca)
Can understand clearly written, straightforward instructions on how to use a piece of equipment. (Ca)
48
Can extract relevant details in everyday letters, brochures and short official documents. (Ca)
49
Can identify the main topic and related ideas in a structured text. (P)
50
Can understand the relationship between a main point and an example in a structured text. (P)
GSE 51–58/B1(+): Reading
51
Can generally understand details of events, feelings and wishes in letters, emails and online postings. (Ca)
Can make simple inferences based on information given in a short article. (P)
Can distinguish between fact and opinion in relation to common topics. (P)
Can recognise the direct repetition of ideas as a simple cohesive device. (P)
52
Can follow chronological sequence in a formal structured text. (P)
54
Can recognise examples and their relation to the idea they support. (P)
55
Can infer meaning based on information in a text. (P)
Can understand written advice and instructions for resolving a problem with a product or piece of 
equipment. (P)
56
Can recognise significant points and arguments in straightforward newspaper articles on familiar topics. 
(Ca)
57
Can recognise the general line of a written argument though not necessarily all the details. (Ca)
Can understand cause and effect relationships in a structured text. (P)
Can identify key information in an extended text or article. (P)
58
Can understand problem and solution relationships in a structured text. (P)
Can understand most correspondence relating to their field of interest. (Ca)
Can recognise the writer’s point of view in a structured text. (P)
Can compare information given in different texts and media on the same topic. (Wa)

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
12
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
GSE 59–66/B2: Reading
59
Can understand instructions for making financial transactions online. (P)
Can use a monolingual dictionary to check the meaning of words without needing to refer to a bilingual 
dictionary. (P)
Can identify the main conclusions in a text that presents and contrasts arguments in a clearly signalled 
way. (Ca)
60
Can identify language used to persuade the reader. (Wa)
Can make inferences or predictions about the content of newspaper and magazine articles from 
headings, titles or headlines. (P)
61
Can distinguish supporting details from the main points in a text. (P)
Can follow the exchanges on the discussion board of a website. (P)
62
Can understand the plot of extended narratives written in standard, non-literary language. (CJa)
Can interpret the main message from complex diagrams and visual information. (P)
Can understand the author’s purpose and intended audience. (P)
Can recognise the use of cohesive devices to link ideas within and between paragraphs in a written text. 
(Wa)
Can recognise the author’s use of irony in a simple text, if guided by questions. (P)
63
Can make inferences about the attitudes and feelings of characters based on evidence in the text. (P)
Can scan a long text or a set of related texts in order to find specific information. (Ca)
Can use reference materials to check factual information, when guidance on finding relevant sources of 
information is provided. (P)
65
Can recognise the tone and intended audience of a structured text. (P)
66
Can summarise, comment on and discuss a wide range of factual and imaginative texts. (Ca)
GSE 67–75/B2(+): Reading
67
Can recognise the repetition of ideas expressed by substitution, paraphrasing, etc. (P)
Can understand differences and similarities between points of view in extended texts. (CJa)
Can identify different styles, genres, and registers in written discourse. (Wa)
68
Can recognise contrasting arguments in structured, discursive text. (P)
Can understand the details of long complex instructions in their field, rereading as necessary. (Ca)
Can infer what will come next in an unstructured text by using contextual, grammatical and lexical cues. 
(P)
Can understand complex technical information such as operating instructions, specifications for familiar 
products and services. (C)
Can understand the positive and negative connotations of words that have similar meanings. (P)
69
Can understand advice given in a linguistically complex text. (P)
Can identify key information in a linguistically complex text. (P)
Can use a variety of reference materials to check factual information quickly and efficiently. (P)
Can synthesise information from different sources in order to give a written or oral summary. (P)
Can quickly scan long, complex texts for key information. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
13
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
70
Can understand inferred meaning in formal structured text. (P)
Can understand complex, detailed correspondence, with occasional support from a dictionary. (Ca)
Can guess the meaning of an unfamiliar word from context in a linguistically complex text. (P)
71
Can understand complex questions in questionnaires designed to elicit opinions. (P)
Can distinguish between fact and opinion in complex formal contexts. (P)
73
Can identify specific information in a linguistically complex factual text. (P)
Can recognise the author’s use of irony in a text. (P)
74
Can understand the intended double meaning of a word in a written text. (P)
Can get the gist of specialised articles and technical texts outside their field. (CJa)
75
Can compare and critically evaluate a summary against the original text. (P)
GSE 76–84/C1: Reading
76
Can understand correspondence containing idiomatic or non-standard language. (Ca)
78
Can understand the use of puns, allusions, jokes etc. in adverts or newspaper headlines. (P)
Can extract information, ideas and opinions from highly specialised sources within their field. (Ca)
Can identify examples that support a particular interpretation of a linguistically complex text. (P)
79
Can understand complex arguments in newspaper articles. (P)
Can identify inferred meaning in a linguistically complex text. (P)
80
Can understand the details of long complex texts in their field without needing to reread. (Ca)
GSE 85–90/C2: Reading
87
Can understand highly colloquial language in unstructured texts that use complex structures. (P)
Can understand long and linguistically complex factual and literary texts, appreciating distinctions of 
style. (CJa)
Can critically evaluate a writer’s choice of words to express nuances of meaning in an argumentative text. 
(Wa)
88
Can critically evaluate the effectiveness of different arguments in a linguistically complex text. (P)
Can critically evaluate the structure, content and style of a text using linguistically complex language. (P)
90
Can critically evaluate the writer’s choice of words to express nuanced meaning in a linguistically complex 
text. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
14
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
Listening
GSE 10–21/Below A1: Listening
10
Can understand cardinal numbers from 1 to 20. (P)
Can recognise simple informal greetings. (P)
Can understand the letters of the alphabet. (P)
Can recognise a few familiar everyday words, if delivered slowly and clearly. (CJa)
11
Can recognise the letters of the English alphabet when pronounced. (CJa)
13
Can recognise simple formal greetings. (P)
16
Can understand very basic common classroom instructions. (P)
18
Can understand the time of day when expressed in full hours. (P)
19
Can recognise familiar words in short phrases and sentences spoken slowly and clearly, if supported by 
pictures. (P)
Can recognise basic time words (e.g. ‘days’, ‘months’) in simple phrases or sentences. (P)
Can understand cardinal numbers from 21 to 100. (P)
20
Can understand simple language related to prices and quantities. (P)
Can understand ordinal numbers from 1 to 100. (P)
21
Can understand basic questions about personal details if addressed slowly and clearly. (P)
Can understand basic personal details if given carefully and slowly. (P)
GSE 22–29/A1: Listening
22
Can understand the main information when people introduce themselves (e.g. ‘name’, ‘age’, ‘where they 
are from’). (P)
23
Can understand questions addressed carefully and slowly. (Ca)
Can understand the time of day when expressed to the quarter hour. (P)
Can understand the time of day when expressed to within five minutes. (P)
Can identify a caller’s name and phone number from a short, simple telephone conversation. (P)
Can understand short, simple instructions addressed carefully and slowly. (Ca)
Can extract the names of people or places from short, simple dialogues, if delivered slowly and clearly. (P)
24
Can understand basic questions about objects in pictures or in their immediate surroundings. (P)
Can understand basic questions about people’s likes and dislikes. (P)
Can distinguish between ‘can’ and ‘can’t’. (P)
Can understand basic statements about where things or people are, if spoken slowly and clearly and 
supported by pictures. (P)
25
Can follow speech which is very slow and carefully articulated, with long pauses. (Ca)
Can understand cardinal numbers from 101 to 1000. (P)
Can understand basic information about someone’s likes and dislikes. (P)
Can recognise basic factual information about times and dates. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
15
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
26
Can understand basic factual statements. (P)
Can identify a caller’s name and phone number from a short, simple telephone conversation. (P)
Can understand simple spoken commands in a game or sport. (P)
Can understand simple directions from X to Y on foot or public transport. (Ca)
Can recognise key information (e.g. ‘place’, ‘time’) about everyday events, if spoken slowly and clearly. (P)
Can recognise words and simple phrases related to familiar topics, if spoken slowly and clearly and 
supported by pictures. (P)
Can identify how much something costs in short, simple dialogues about the price, if delivered slowly and 
clearly. (P)
27
Can understand basic information about prices, times, and dates in familiar contexts, if spoken slowly 
and clearly. (P)
Can understand basic information about free time activities. (P)
Can understand basic questions about free time activities. (P)
Can understand a phone number from a recorded message. (P)
Can recognise familiar key words and phrases in short, basic descriptions (e.g. of ‘objects’, ‘places’ or 
‘people’), if spoken slowly and clearly. (P)
28
Can identify common objects from spoken descriptions, if spoken slowly and clearly. (P)
Can understand basic information about someone when introduced to them using simple language. (P)
Can understand simple directions, if spoken slowly and clearly. (P)
Can recognise a few key words or phrases in a simple presentation. (P)
29
Can identify objects, places or people from short spoken descriptions. (Wa)
Can understand what people say they can or can’t do from simple sentences spoken slowly and clearly. 
(P)
Can follow simple, everyday transactions (e.g. ‘shopping’ and ‘eating out’) if carried out slowly and clearly. 
(CJa)
GSE 30–35/A2: Listening 
30
Can understand excuses if expressed in simple language. (P)
Can identify simple information in a short video, provided that the visual supports this information and the 
delivery is slow and clear. (P)
Can recognise phrases and content words related to basic personal and family information. (Ca)
Can extract key factual information such as prices, times and dates from short clear, simple 
announcements. (P)
31
Can recognise phrases and content words related to familiar topics (e.g. ‘shopping’, ‘local geography’). 
(C)
Can identify key words and phrases in descriptions of someone’s appearance and clothes. (P)
32
Can understand information related to people’s daily routines. (P)
Can identify basic factual information in short, simple dialogues or narratives on familiar everyday topics, 
if spoken slowly and clearly. (P)
Can understand key information about arrangements in simple dialogues spoken slowly and clearly. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
16
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
33
Can understand simple, everyday conversations if conducted slowly and clearly. (Ca)
Can follow short, simple social exchanges. (P)
Can identify key information (e.g. ‘places’, ‘times’) from short audio recordings, if spoken slowly and 
clearly. (P)
Can understand the main information in short, simple dialogues about familiar activities, if spoken slowly 
and clearly. (P)
34
Can understand the main information in simple conversations about hobbies and interests. (P)
Can recognise simple, fixed expressions used in small talk. (P)
35
Can extract key factual information such as prices, times and dates from a recorded phone message. (P)
Can understand who a phone call is intended for. (P)
Can understand short, basic descriptions of familiar topics and situations, if delivered slowly and clearly. 
(P)
Can identify specific information in short, simple dialogues in which speakers make arrangements to do 
something, if spoken slowly and clearly. (P)
Can recognise some fixed expressions used to confirm information. (P)
GSE 36–42/A2(+): Listening 
36
Can recognise when speakers disagree in a conversation conducted slowly and clearly. (P)
Can follow a simple conversation or narrative about familiar, everyday activities. (P)
Can recognise when speakers agree in a conversation conducted slowly and clearly. (P)
37
Can recognise simple expressions of agreement and disagreement in short discussions, if conducted 
slowly and clearly. (P)
Can identify activities occurring in the past in short, simple dialogues. (P)
Can follow the sequence of events in a short, simple dialogue or narrative. (P)
Can get the gist of short, simple stories if told slowly and clearly. (P)
Can understand enough to respond to direct requests expressed slowly and clearly. (Ca)
Can recognise some fixed expressions to check or clarify information. (P)
38
Can make basic inferences in simple conversations on familiar everyday topics. (P)
Can understand standard speech on familiar matters, with some repetition or reformulation. (Ca)
Can identify specific events from short spoken descriptions. (Wa)
Can understand specific information in a short, simple phone call. (P)
39
Can understand the key details of hotel, restaurant, and transport reservations. (P)
Can generally identify the topic of discussion around them when conducted slowly and clearly. (C)
Can identify key details in a simple recorded dialogue or narrative. (P)
Can understand basic information in a short presentation. (P)
40
Can understand enough to manage simple routine exchanges without undue effort. (C)
41
Can derive the probable meaning of simple, unknown words from short, familiar contexts. (P)
42
Can understand basic medical advice. (P)
Can understand the main points of a short, informal interview on a familiar topic. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
17
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
GSE 43–50/B1: Listening
43
Can identify a simple chronological sequence in a recorded narrative or dialogue. (P)
Can listen to a short narrative and predict what will happen next. (N2000)
Can understand instructions delivered at normal speed and accompanied by visual support. (P)
44
Can follow everyday conversation, with some repetition of particular words and phrases. (P)
Can recognise when a speaker is checking that the listener has understood something in a conversation 
conducted slowly and clearly. (P)
45
Can extract key factual information such as dates, numbers and quantities from a presentation. (P)
Can follow familiar topics if the speaker is clear and avoids idiomatic usage. (Ca)
Can follow the main points of short talks on familiar topics if delivered in clear standard speech. (Ca)
46
Can recognise simple expressions of agreement and disagreement in extended discussions, if conducted 
in clear standard speech. (P)
Can follow the main points of extended discussion around them if in standard speech. (Ca)
Can extract key factual information from a phone conversation on a familiar topic. (P)
47
Can understand the main points of narratives and conversations about familiar topics (e.g. ‘work’, ‘leisure’) 
delivered in clear standard speech. (Ca)
48
Can get the gist of explanations of unfamiliar cultural practices and customs, if delivered slowly and 
clearly. (CJa)
Can understand the main points of a simple podcast. (P)
49
Can follow the linear structure of a short formal talk. (P)
Can understand simple technical instructions for everyday equipment. (Ca)
Can follow most of an everyday conversation if speakers avoid very idiomatic usage. (Ca)
Can identify the main point of TV news items reporting events, accidents, etc. where the visual supports 
the commentary. (C)
Can generally follow changes of topic in discussions related to their field if conducted slowly and clearly. 
(Ca)
50
Can recognise a speaker’s feelings or attitudes. (P)
GSE 51–58/B1(+): Listening
51
Can follow an everyday conversation or informal interview on common topics. (P)
Can understand most of a weather forecast on the radio. (CSEa)
Can follow the main points in TV programmes on familiar topics if delivered in clear standard speech. (Ca)
Can infer speakers’ opinions in conversations on familiar everyday topics. (P)
Can distinguish between main ideas and supporting details in familiar, standard texts. (P)
Can follow recorded instructions and information given on a phone-delivered service. (P)
52
Can recognise that a joke has been made, even if the meaning is not fully understood. (P)
Can follow many films in which visuals and action carry much of the storyline. (Ca)
53
Can follow detailed directions. (C)
Can understand the key points about a radio programme on a familiar topic. (P)
Can recognise repetition of the same topic in extended presentations or lectures. (Wa)

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
18
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
54
Can understand a range of formal and informal excuses. (P)
55
Can understand advice and instructions for resolving a problem with a product or piece of equipment. (P)
Can recognise examples and their relation to the idea they support. (P)
56
Can distinguish between different points of view in a discussion or presentation. (Wa)
57
Can follow classes and training courses on a range of subjects, provided the content is simple. (CSEa)
Can recognise when a speaker uses basic rhetorical questions in conversation. (P)
Can follow most of a clearly structured presentation within their own field. (Ca)
Can extract the meaning of unknown words from context if the topic discussed is familiar. (Ca)
Can deduce the general meaning of a passage from context in a longer, structured text. (P)
Can generally follow rapid or extended speech, but may require repetition or clarification. (Ca)
58
Can recognise misunderstandings without explicit prompting. (P)
Can understand a large part of many TV programmes on familiar topics. (Ca)
Can understand problem and solution relationships in informal conversation. (P)
GSE 59–66/B2: Listening
59
Can identify the main reasons for and against an argument or idea in a discussion delivered in clear 
standard speech. (P)
Can relate information in a presentation to the same information given in graphs, charts and tables. (Wa)
60
Can distinguish between relevant and irrelevant content in extended informal speech. (P)
Can understand most of a radio programme about a familiar topic. (Ca)
Can recognise that a speaker is expressing concerns in a formal discussion. (P)
61
Can understand scripted speech delivered quickly, if the accent is familiar. (Ca)
Can follow changes of topic in factual TV news items and form an idea of the main content. (C)
Can recognise when examples are being given in a structured presentation on an unfamiliar topic. (P)
Can follow the stages of a complex process described using non-technical language. (P)
62
Can follow a natural group discussion, but may find it difficult to participate effectively. (Ca)
Can understand detailed instructions well enough to be able to follow them without making mistakes. (C)
63
Can recognise the speaker’s point of view in a structured presentation. (P)
64
Can understand TV documentaries, interviews, plays and most films in standard speech. (Ca)
Can understand unscripted speech delivered quickly, if the accent is familiar. (Ca)
Can understand main points and check comprehension by using contextual clues. (Ca)
Can understand the advantages and disadvantages of different options during a discussion. (P)
Can recognise the use of hyperbole (e.g. ‘It’s going to take me years to finish this’). (P)

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
19
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
65
Can extract the main points from news items, etc. with opinions, arguments and discussion. (Ca)
Can understand cause and effect relationships in informal conversation at natural speed. (P)
Can understand most of a radio programme aimed at a general audience. (P)
Can follow chronological sequences in extended informal speech at natural speed. (P)
Can understand the speaker’s point of view on most topics delivered at natural speed and in standard 
language. (CJa)
66
Can recognise the tone and intended audience of a formal presentation. (P)
Can distinguish between fact and opinion in informal discussion at natural speed. (P)
Can understand the main ideas of complex technical discussions in their field. (Ca)
GSE 67–75/B2(+): Listening
69
Can understand summaries of data or research used to support an extended argument. (P)
Can extract specific details from poor quality public announcements, e.g., in a ‘station’, ‘sports stadium’, 
etc. (N2000a)
Can follow the main points in a linguistically complex interview, if provided with written supporting 
material. (P)
70
Can follow a wide range of factual and creative texts and summarise themes and opinions. (Ca)
Can follow the main points in a linguistically complex interview, if provided with written supporting 
material. (P)
71
Can infer attitude and mood in discussions by using contextual, grammatical and lexical cues. (Ca)
Can understand when something is being said ironically in a casual conversation. (N2007a)
Can identify key information in linguistically complex conversations at natural speed. (P)
Can understand the main points of complex and abstract presentations in their field. (Ca)
Can differentiate between rhetorical and genuine questions in informal discussion. (P)
Can recognise the use of rhetorical questions to reveal unstated assumptions. (P)
Can recognise repetition of ideas through substitution, paraphrasing, etc. in complex arguments. (P)
72
Can understand detailed medical advice. (P)
Can understand most TV news and current affairs programmes. (C)
Can understand the main points of complex academic/professional presentations. (Ca)
Can understand the use of irony to emphasise a speaker’s meaning. (P)
73
Can follow extended speech expressing unstructured ideas and thoughts. (P)
74
Can recognise the language and strategies used when a speaker is avoiding answering a question. (P)
Can follow an animated conversation between two fluent speakers. (Ca)
Can follow extended speech on abstract and complex topics outside their field, if able to ask for 
confirmation of details. (Ca)

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
20
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
GSE 76–84/C1: Listening
76
Can follow a fast-paced conversation between fluent speakers well enough to be able to contribute. (Ca)
77
Can recognise coherence devices and follow complex arguments on unfamiliar topics. (P)
78
Can understand the intended double meaning of a word used in a joke. (P)
Can understand most of a linguistically complex podcast. (P)
79
Can follow presentations on abstract and complex topics outside their field of interest. (P)
Can understand stories being told by a fluent speaker using colloquial language. (P)
80
Can follow films employing a considerable degree of slang and idiomatic usage. (C)
81
Can recognise a speaker’s feelings or attitude in linguistically complex speech. (P)
Can infer meaning, opinion, attitude, etc. in fast-paced conversations between fluent speakers. (P)
82
Can understand the details in a linguistically complex audio recording. (P)
83
Can understand the details of extended and linguistically complex talks on a range of political, 
environmental, and social issues. (P)
Can recognise a wide range of idiomatic expressions and colloquialisms, appreciating register shifts. 
(N2000)
GSE 85–90/C2: Listening
86
Can understand the details of extended and linguistically complex professional and technical 
presentations. (N2000a)
88
Can understand in detail discussions on abstract and complex topics among speakers with a variety of 
accents and dialects. (Ca)

=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
21
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
Speaking
GSE 10–21/Below A1: Speaking
10
Can say their name. (P)
Can ask someone for their name. (P)
11
Can make simple purchases by pointing or other gestures. (N2000a)
Can say the letters of the alphabet. (P)
12
Can introduce themselves using a basic phrase (e.g. ‘My name’s ...’). (P)
Can greet people using a few basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can use a few basic words and phrases to show politeness (e.g. ‘please’, ‘thank you’). (P)
Can name a few very common everyday objects. (P)
Can recognise and say the name of their own country, nationality and language. (P)
13
Can read out phone numbers. (P)
Can ask someone what their nationality is. (P)
14
Can spell out their own name and address. (P)
15
Can say other people’s nationalities. (P)
16
Can tell the time of day in full hours. (P)
Can ask and answer basic requests for information with ‘What’s this/that?’ (P)
Can name a few common jobs. (P)
Can give very limited personal information using basic fixed expressions. (CJa)
17
Can ask for and give a phone number. (P)
Can name very common forms of transport. (P)
Can use some very basic words to ask for food and drink. (P)
18
Can use a few simple words to describe objects (e.g. ‘colour’, ‘number’), if supported by pictures. (P)
Can say their own age and ask someone about their age. (P)
19
Can ask for and give the day and date. (N2000a)
Can ask someone what their job is. (P)
Can say what they do (e.g. ‘name of their job’, ‘student’). (P)
Can establish basic social contacts with simple, polite greetings and farewells. (Ca)
Can ask about the price of something. (P)
20
Can ask where other people are in a limited way. (P)
Can say a range of basic numbers, quantities and prices. (Ca)
Can ask for and give a date of birth. (P)
21
Can ask very simply for repetition when they don’t understand. (C)
Can ask and answer simple questions about things they have in a limited way. (Ca)

=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
22
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
GSE 22–29/A1: Speaking
22
Can say where they and other people are in a limited way. (P)
Can ask and answer basic questions about family and friends in a limited way. (P)
Can tell the time of day to within five minutes. (P)
Can answer simple questions about objects (e.g. ‘colour’, ‘size’). (P)
Can ask for the spelling of a word, or for a word to be written down. (P)
Can introduce themselves in a basic way, giving some information about where they live, their family etc. 
(CSEa)
23
Can give basic information about the price of something. (P)
Can describe the position of something in a very basic way. (P)
Can give key information to introduce themselves (e.g. ‘name’, ‘age’, ‘where they are from’). (P)
24
Can ask for a drink or food in a limited way. (P)
Can buy tickets on public transport using basic fixed expressions. (N2000a)
Can agree to simple requests using a few basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can greet people, ask how they are and react to news. (Ca)
Can give dates using standard formats (day and month). (P)
Can describe objects in a basic way (e.g. ‘colour’, ‘size’). (P)
Can tell the time of day to the quarter hour. (P)
25
Can ask for and give very basic information about the home. (P)
Can ask and answer simple questions in areas of immediate need or on very familiar topics. (Ca)
Can indicate time by such phrases as ‘next week’, ‘last Friday’, ‘in November’, ‘three o’clock’. (C)
Can accurately repeat clearly spoken words, phrases, and short sentences. (P)
26
Can make a few basic requests related to immediate personal needs (e.g. ‘Can I have a pen, please?’). (P)
Can introduce someone in a basic way, giving their name and job title. (P)
Can introduce themselves, their hobbies and interests in a basic way. (CJa)
Can read aloud short, familiar fixed expressions in a way that can be understood. (P)
Can check into a hotel using a few basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can ask basic questions about objects (e.g. ‘colour’, ‘size’). (P)
Can describe where they live. (Ca)
Can ask for things using basic language. (P)
Can say how much something costs using basic language. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
23
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
27
Can accept offers using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can introduce people using basic language. (P)
Can ask simple questions about numbers of objects there are using a basic phrase (e.g. ‘how many?’). (P)
Can ask simple questions about other people (e.g. their ‘name’, ‘age’, ‘where they live’, ‘things they have’). 
(P)
Can say what someone’s job is, using familiar common job names. (P)
Can express ability or lack of ability with regard to basic activities using ‘can’ or ‘can’t’. (P)
Can ask for help using basic fixed expressions. (P)
28
Can exchange personal details (e.g. ‘where they live’, ‘things they have’). (Ca)
Can answer simple questions about the location of people or things in a limited way. (P)
Can express how they are feeling using very basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can ask people for things and give people things. (C)
Can make an introduction and use basic greeting and leave-taking expressions. (C)
Can ask and answer simple questions about people they know in a limited way. (Ca)
Can express preferences about food and drink using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can describe a person’s likes and dislikes using simple language. (P)
Can answer simple questions about their daily activities or routines, given a model. (P)
Can use brief, everyday expressions to describe wants and needs, and request information. (Ca)
Can use basic words to describe common weather conditions. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
24
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
29
Can describe an object using simple language. (P)
Can ask for attention. (C)
Can respond politely when introduced to someone, using a few basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can talk about the family in a basic way, given prompts. (P)
Can ask for simple directions, referring to a map or plan. (P)
Can answer simple questions about habits and routines. (P)
Can say who something belongs to. (P)
GSE 30–35/A2: Speaking
30
Can talk about familiar topics using a few basic words and phrases. (P)
Can make requests related to immediate needs using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can describe a person’s hobbies and activities using simple language. (P)
Can end a simple phone call to family or friends using basic informal fixed expressions. (P)
Can ask for repetition and clarification when they don’t understand, using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can initiate and respond to simple statements on very familiar topics. (Ca)
Can ask to borrow things using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can express basic intentions with simple time markers (e.g. ‘tomorrow’). (P)
Can talk about hotel accommodation using simple language. (P)
Can ask basic questions about colour, size, price etc. when shopping. (CSEa)
Can give a short description of their home, family and job, given some help with vocabulary. (P)
31
Can use simple phrases to order a meal. (Ca)
Can describe what someone is wearing using a limited range of expressions. (P)
Can ask someone about their hobbies and activities using simple language. (P)
Can talk about everyday things (e.g. ‘people’, ‘places’, ‘job’, ‘study’) in a basic way. (Ca)
Can ask simple questions to find out about a subject. (P)
Can express their likes and dislikes in relation to familiar topics using simple language. (P)
Can give simple classroom instructions. (P)
Can describe their daily routines in a simple way. (P)
Can make and accept a simple apology. (P)
Can talk about furniture and rooms using simple language. (P)
Can describe common everyday objects using simple language. (P)
Can make simple invitations using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can ask for and provide things using simple phrases. (Ca)
Can make simple purchases by stating what is wanted and asking for the price. (C)
Can ask about the location of places in a town, using simple language. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
25
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
32
Can start or end a short conversation using basic fixed expressions. (Ca)
Can give simple directions using a map or plan. (P)
Can handle common everyday transactions (e.g. ‘buying a ticket’). (Ca)
Can ask others if they can do everyday activities using simple language, given a model. (P)
Can ask for simple directions from X to Y on foot or by public transport. (P)
Can give a simple description of their school or workplace. (CSEa)
Can compare quantities in a basic way. (P)
Can express agreement using simple fixed expressions. (P)
Can make offers using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can use brief, everyday expressions to ask for and give personal details. (Ca)
33
Can introduce themselves on the phone and close a simple call. (P)
Can describe the position of things in a picture using a range of fixed expressions (P)
Can decline offers using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can make simple transactions in shops, post offices and banks. (Ca)
Can ask simple questions about quantities and amounts. (P)
Can answer simple questions about quantities and amounts, given help with vocabulary. (P)
Can describe skills and abilities using simple language. (P)
Can talk about their life (e.g. ‘family’, ‘home’, ‘job’), using simple language. (P)
Can describe their family, living conditions, education and present or most recent job. (C)
Can make simple references to the past using ‘was/were’. (P)
Can describe familiar activities, given visual support. (P)
Can describe their home town or city using simple language. (P)
Can make excuses using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can describe basic activities or events that are happening at the time of speaking. (P)
Can give the order of things using simple language (e.g. ‘first’, ‘second’, ‘third’). (P)

=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
26
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
34
Can use simple language to describe people’s appearance. (N2000)
Can ask someone to repeat a specific point or idea. (P)
Can answer simple questions in a face-to-face survey. (P)
Can give simple opinions using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can agree or refuse to lend things using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can exchange simple information on everyday topics, provided the other person speaks slowly and 
clearly and is prepared to help. (Ca)
Can show understanding using a limited range of fixed expressions. (P)
Can ask simple questions in a face-to-face survey. (P)
Can describe people’s everyday lives using a short series of simple phrases and sentences. (Ca)
Can say how often they and others do common everyday activities, using basic frequency expressions 
(e.g. ‘every Monday’, ‘twice a month’). (P)
Can describe jobs in a basic way, given a model. (P)
Can take part in a very simple conversation on a familiar topic if the other speaker repeats questions and 
answers as necessary and speaks slowly and clearly. (P)
Can ask for basic advice using simple language. (P)
Can answer simple questions on the phone using fixed expressions. (P)
Can express general preferences using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can say what they like and dislike. (C)
Can respond to suggestions to do something using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can give simple directions from X to Y on foot or by public transport. (P)
35
Can check that someone has understood information, using simple language. (P)
Can ask for repetition or clarification on the phone in a simple way. (P)
Can use a limited range of fixed expressions to describe objects, possessions, or products. (P)
Can describe a travel experience with a few very basic stock phrases. (P)
Can ask for and provide everyday goods and services. (C)
Can ask and answer questions about what they do at work and in their free time. (C)
Can refuse requests politely, using simple language. (P)
Can answer simple questions about their life and experiences. (P)
Can make simple requests to have or do something in relation to common everyday activities. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
27
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
GSE 36–42/A2(+): Speaking
36
Can make and accept offers. (N2000)
Can use simple, everyday polite forms of greeting and address. (C)
Can ask someone simple questions about their life and experiences. (P)
Can make small talk using simple language, given a model. (P)
Can communicate in routine tasks requiring simple, direct exchanges of information. (Ca)
Can discuss what to do and where to go, and make arrangements to meet. (C)
Can ask and talk about very basic symptoms and ailments (e.g. ‘cold’, ‘flu’). (P)
Can leave simple phone messages using fixed expressions. (P)
37
Can answer simple questions and respond to simple statements in an interview. (C)
Can describe everyday activities in town (e.g. ‘buying food at the supermarket’, ‘borrowing a book from 
the library’) using simple language. (P)
Can compare their own and others’ possessions using simple language. (Ca)
Can make an invitation including information about the time and location. (P)
Can give compliments, using fixed expressions. (P)
Can give simple instructions to complete a basic task, given a model. (P)
Can confirm information using some simple fixed expressions. (P)
Can make simple, direct comparisons between two people or things using common adjectives. (P)
Can describe what something is used for, using basic fixed expressions. (P)
38
Can take simple phone messages using fixed expressions. (P)
Can express how they feel in simple terms. (Ca)
Can deal with practical everyday demands, exchanging straightforward factual information. (Ca)
Can make a hotel, restaurant, or transportation reservation on the phone. (P)
Can describe very basic events in the past using simple linking words (e.g. ‘then’, ‘next’). (P)
Can read out a short, rehearsed statement (e.g. ‘introduce a speaker’, ‘propose a toast’). (Ca)
Can ask and answer questions about basic plans and intentions. (P)
Can talk about an event in the past using fixed expressions, given a model. (P)
Can ask and answer questions about habits and routines. (C)
Can give an extended description of everyday topics (e.g. ‘people’, ‘places’, ‘experiences’). (N2000a)
Can describe habits and routines. (Ca)

=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
28
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
39
Can initiate, maintain and close simple, restricted face-to-face conversations. (N2000)
Can describe plans and arrangements. (Ca)
Can make suggestions about doing common everyday activities, using simple fixed expressions. (P)
Can use simple language to describe people’s personality and emotions. (P)
Can talk about plans for the near future in a simple way. (P)
Can use simple fixed expressions to give encouragement (e.g. ‘You can do it!’) (P)
Can give simple reasons to explain preferences, given a model. (P)
Can get information from a tourist office of a straightforward, non-specialised nature. (Ca)
Can give basic advice using simple language. (P)
40
Can tell a story or describe something in a simple list of points. (C)
Can discuss what to do in the evening or at the weekend. (C)
Can respond to excuses using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can make a short rehearsed announcement on a familiar topic. (Ca)
Can ask for and give or refuse permission. (N2000)
Can express enthusiasm and excitement in a limited way. (P)
Can ask for clarification about key words not understood, using fixed expressions. (Ca)
Can give a simple description of how to carry out an everyday process (e.g. ‘a recipe’). (P)
Can explain what they like or dislike about something. (C)
Can ask and answer questions about past times and past activities. (C)
Can talk about past events or experiences, using simple language (P)
Can say how they or someone else feels, giving brief reasons. (P)
41
Can show interest in conversation using fixed expressions. (P)
Can check or clarify information using some simple fixed expressions. (P)
Can answer simple questions about work experience or education using simple language.  (P)
Can give the reasons for a choice, using simple language. (P)
Can participate in short conversations in routine contexts on topics of interest. (C)
Can cancel a hotel, restaurant, or transportation reservation on the phone. (P)
Can talk about personal possessions, including household pets. (N2000a)
Can discuss what to do next using simple phrases. (Ca)
Can make and respond to suggestions. (C)
42
Can make an appointment on the phone. (P)
Can give a short, basic description of events and activities. (C)
Can ask about someone’s work experience or education using simple language. (P)
Can use some basic interjections to express understanding, surprise, disappointment, and excitement. (P)
Can express regret using simple language. (P)
Can make simple future arrangements and plans with reference to a diary or schedule. (P)
Can make simple predictions about the future. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
29
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
GSE 43–50/B1: Speaking
43
Can describe future plans and intentions using fixed expressions. (P)
Can make a complaint using simple language. (P)
Can paraphrase a simple factual statement related to a familiar topic. (P)
44
Can use fixed expressions to keep a conversation going (e.g. ‘I see.’, ‘right’). (CSEa)
Can ask for, follow and give detailed directions. (Ca)
Can summarise short written passages using the original wording and ordering. (Ca)
Can give a short talk about a familiar topic, with visual support. (P)
Can describe what they are looking for when shopping. (CSEa)
Can react appropriately to good and bad news using fixed expressions. (P)
45
Can ask for changes to a hotel, restaurant, or transportation reservation on the phone. (P)
Can deal with less routine situations on public transport (e.g. asking ‘where to get off’). (N2000a)
Can explain the rules of a familiar game or sport using simple language. (P)
Can carry out a prepared structured interview with some spontaneous follow-up questions. (Ca)
Can express belief, opinion, agreement and disagreement politely. (C)
Can make simple recommendations for a course of action in familiar everyday situations. (P)
Can express opinions using simple language. (P)
Can respond to an offer or suggestion, expressing enthusiasm. (P)
Can convey simple information of immediate relevance and emphasise the main point. (Ca)
Can use simple appropriate language to check that information has been understood on the phone. (P)
Can explain the meaning of a word or phrase using simple language. (P)
Can describe how often a work-related task should be completed. (P)
Can deal with common situations when making travel arrangements or travelling. (Ca)
Can narrate a story. (C)
Can convey simple relevant information emphasising the most important point. (Ca)
Can give brief reasons and explanations, using simple language. (P)
Can use simple expressions to explain a basic technical problem. (P)
Can make an apology with brief excuses or reasons. (P)
Can give an opinion when asked directly, provided they can ask for repetition. (Ca)
46
Can invite others to give their views on what to do next. (C)
Can buy a ticket for an event on the phone. (P)
Can arrange a delivery time on the phone. (P)
Can initiate, maintain and close simple, face-to-face conversations on familiar topics. (Ca)
Can express preferences about food and drink in detail. (P)
Can give or seek personal views and opinions in discussing topics of interest. (C)

=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
30
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
47
Can describe events, real or imagined. (C)
Can give straightforward descriptions on a variety of familiar subjects. (Ca)
Can begin to use a repertoire of common idiomatic phrases in routine situations. (Ca)
Can express attitudes using simple language. (P)
Can enter unprepared into conversation on familiar topics (e.g. ‘family’, ‘hobbies’, ‘work’). (Ca)
48
Can introduce a conversation topic with the present perfect and provide details in the past. (P)
Can make an invitation using formal language. (P)
Can describe dreams, hopes and ambitions. (C)
49
Can respond in a simple way to verbal challenge or aggression. (P)
Can give detailed accounts of experiences, describing feelings and reactions. (C)
Can discuss everyday, practical issues when the conversation is conducted slowly and clearly. (Ca)
50
Can carry out a simple informal interview. (P)
Can give simple reasons to justify a viewpoint on a familiar topic. (P)
Can take some initiative in an interview, but is generally very dependent on interviewer. (Ca)
Can ask someone to clarify or elaborate what they have just said. (C)
Can discuss films, books or plays in simple terms, using fixed expressions. (P)
Can give detailed directions to a driver. (P)
Can relate the plot of a book or film and describe their reactions. (C)
Can negotiate prices and ask for discounts. (P)
GSE 51–58/B1(+): Speaking
51
Can report the opinions of others, using simple language. (P)
Can express opinions as regards possible solutions, giving brief reasons and explanations. (Ca)
Can briefly give reasons and explanations for opinions, plans and actions. (C)
Can express and respond to feelings (e.g. ‘surprise’, ‘happiness’, ‘interest’, ‘indifference’). (C)
Can express opinions and react to practical suggestions of where to go, what to do, etc. (Ca)
Can make a complaint. (C)
Can respond to opinions expressed by others. (Wa)
Can express hopes for the future using a range of fixed expressions. (CJa)
52
Can speak in general terms about environmental problems. (P)
Can express opinions and attitudes using a range of basic expressions and sentences. (Ca)
Can use a suitable phrase to invite others into a discussion. (Ca)
Can discuss the main points of news stories about familiar topics. (CJa)
Can repeat back what is said to confirm understanding and keep a discussion on course. (Ca)

=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
31
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
53
Can give a short, rehearsed talk or presentation on a familiar topic. (Ca)
Can use a basic repertoire of conversation strategies to maintain a discussion. (Ca)
Can ask someone to paraphrase a specific point or idea. (P)
Can re-tell a familiar story using their own words. (P)
Can develop an argument using common fixed expressions. (P)
Can compare and contrast alternatives about what to do, where to go, etc. (Ca)
Can signal that they wish to bring a conversation to an end. (P)
Can define the features of something concrete for which they can’t remember the word. (C)
54
Can make excuses using a range of polite forms. (P)
Can describe basic symptoms to a doctor, but with limited precision. (Ca)
Can answer simple factual questions about a presentation they have given. (P)
Can relate the basic details of unpredictable occurrences (e.g. ‘an accident’). (Ca)
Can leave phone messages containing detailed information. (P)
55
Can explain the main points in an idea or problem with reasonable precision. (C)
Can respond to ideas and suggestions in informal discussions. (Ca)
Can politely interrupt during a formal conversation, using fixed expressions (P)
Can report factual information given by other people. (P)
Can generally follow most of what is said and repeat back details to confirm understanding. (Ca)
Can use synonyms to describe or gloss an unknown word. (Ca)
Can ask for clarification of an unknown acronym or technical term used in conversation. (P)
Can express their thoughts in some detail on cultural topics (e.g. ‘music’, ‘films’). (Ca)
Can explain why something is a problem. (C)
56
Can ask for confirmation of understanding during a live discussion or presentation. (P)
Can summarise and give opinions on issues and stories and answer questions in detail. (Ca)
Can summarise and comment on a short story or article and answer questions in detail. (Ca)
Can express approval and appreciation of other people’s ideas in a discussion. (Wa)
Can give an opinion on practical problems, with support when necessary. (Ca)
Can give brief comments on the views of others. (C)
Can decline offers politely using a range of formal and informal expressions. (P)
Can express and comment on ideas and suggestions in informal discussions. (Ca)
57
Can respond to excuses using a range of polite forms. (P)
Can reasonably fluently relate a straightforward narrative or description as a linear sequence of points. 
(Ca)
Can carry out a prepared interview, checking and confirming information as necessary. (Ca)
Can ask for advice on a wide range of subjects. (P)
Can collate information from several written sources and summarise the ideas orally. (Ca)

=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
32
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
58
Can tell someone about a discussion or conversation in some detail. (P)
Can express support in a manner that shows they were actively listening to the other person. (P)
Can ask a question in a different way if misunderstood. (N2007a)
Can express disagreement in a manner that shows they were actively listening to the other person. (P)
Can report the opinions of others. (P)
GSE 59–66/B2: Speaking
59
Can give basic technical instructions in their field of specialisation. (P)
Can deal with less common situations in a shop, post office (e.g. ‘returning an unsatisfactory purchase’). 
(Ca)
Can describe objects, possessions and products in detail, including their characteristics and special 
features. (P)
Can tell a short story about something funny or interesting that has happened, including detail to 
maintain the listener’s interest. (P)
Can describe people’s personality and emotions in some detail. (P)
Can describe the plot of a book or film in some detail. (CSEa)
Can discuss options and possible actions. (P)
Can exchange information on a wide range of topics within their field with some confidence. (Ca)
60
Can suggest solutions to problems and explain why they would work. (P)
Can talk about possibilities in the past with precision. (P)
Can pass on a detailed piece of information reliably. (Ca)
Can express an inference or assumption about a person’s mood or emotional state. (P)
Can show interest and appreciation in conversation using a range of expressions. (P)
Can describe future plans and intentions in detail, giving degrees of probability. (P)
Can describe an everyday consumer-related problem and request a correction or solution. (P)
Can give the advantages and disadvantages of various options on a topical issue. (Ca)
Can take part in routine formal discussions conducted in clear standard speech in which factual 
information is exchanged. (Ca)
Can bring relevant personal experiences into a conversation to illustrate a point. (P)
Can justify and sustain views clearly by providing relevant explanations and arguments. (Ca)
Can justify a viewpoint on a topical issue by discussing pros and cons of various options. (Ca)
Can paraphrase in simpler terms what someone else has said. (P)
Can describe the degree of necessity of various actions. (P)
Can correct mistakes if they have led to misunderstandings. (N2000)

=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
33
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
61
Can respond to clearly expressed questions on a presentation they have given. (Ca)
Can show degrees of agreement using a range of language. (P)
Can engage in extended conversation in a clearly participatory fashion on most general topics. (Ca)
Can describe what they would do and how they would react to situations in a text. (P)
Can express their opinions in discussions on contemporary social issues and current affairs. (CSEa)
Can use a range of language to make detailed comparisons of quantities. (P)
Can give detailed answers to questions in a face-to-face survey. (P)
Can use a limited number of cohesive devices with some ‘jumpiness’ in a long contribution. (Ca)
Can express feelings (e.g. ‘sympathy’, ‘surprise’, ‘interest’) with confidence, using a range of expressions. 
(P)
62
Can construct a chain of reasoned argument. (C)
Can make a note of favourite mistakes and consciously monitor speech for them. (C)
Can recommend a course of action, giving reasons. (P)
Can encourage discussion by inviting others to join in, say what they think, etc. (Ca)
Can use a range of language to express degrees of enthusiasm. (P)
Can describe how to do something, giving detailed instructions. (C)
Can make a formal apology with detailed excuses or reasons. (P)
Can justify the reasons for a particular decision or course of action. (P)
63
Can accurately describe a problem with a product or piece of equipment. (P)
Can introduce a new topic during a formal discussion. (P)
Can develop an argument giving reasons in support of or against a particular point of view. (N2000)
Can describe the personal significance of events and experiences in detail. (Ca)
Can introduce a new perspective on the topic of a discussion. (Wa)
Can give a clear, detailed spoken description of how to carry out a procedure. (C)
64
Can make spontaneous announcements clearly and fluently. (Ca)
Can compare and contrast situations in some detail and speculate about the reasons for the current 
situation. (P)
Can plan what is to be said and the means to say it, considering the effect on the recipient. (Ca)
Can use stock phrases to gain time and keep the turn whilst formulating what to say. (Ca)
Can fluently substitute an equivalent term for a word they can’t recall. (Ca)
Can speculate about causes, consequences or hypothetical situations. (N2000)
Can explain a problem and demand what action should be taken in an appropriate way. (Ca)
Can summarise orally the plot and sequence of events in an extract from a film or play. (Ca)
Can express views clearly and evaluate hypothetical proposals in informal discussions. (Ca)

=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
34
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
65
Can talk about financial problems. (P)
Can manage discussion on familiar topics confirming comprehension, inviting others in, etc. (Ca)
Can describe goals using a range of expressions. (P)
Can use intonation to indicate various degrees of certainty during a discussion. (P)
Can express opinions about news stories using a wide range of everyday language. (P)
Can use a range of language to express degrees of reluctance. (P)
66
Can give a detailed summary of a film including information about the plot, characters and setting. (P)
Can outline an issue or problem clearly. (Ca)
Can speculate about a future event using a range of linguistic devices. (P)
Can give advice on a wide range of subjects. (P)
Can develop an argument well enough to be followed without difficulty most of the time. (C)
Can give clear, detailed descriptions on a wide range of familiar subjects. (Ca)
Can introduce new information during a formal discussion or presentation (P)
Can summarise a wide range of texts, discussing contrasting points and main themes. (Ca)
Can contribute to a conversation fluently and naturally, provided the topic is not too abstract or complex. 
(P)
Can develop a clear argument with supporting subsidiary points and relevant examples. (Ca)
GSE 67–75/B2(+): Speaking
67
Can speculate about the causes of an issue or problem. (Ca)
Can narrate a story in detail, giving relevant information about feelings and reactions. (P)
Can use a suitable phrase to intervene in a discussion on a familiar topic. (Ca)
Can adjust to the changes of direction, style and emphasis normally found in conversation. (C)
68
Can initiate, maintain and end discourse naturally with effective turn-taking. (Ca)
Can emphasise a point in a conversation using rhetorical questions. (P)
69
Can comment tactfully on other people’s contributions to a discussion. (Wa)
Can precisely express the potential consequences of actions or events. (P)
Can paraphrase an idea using a range of linguistic devices. (P)
Can politely avoid answering a question without making it obvious to the listener. (N2007a)
Can express an attitude, opinion or idea using idiomatic language. (P)
Can present factual information in an objective way in extended spoken discourse. (Wa)
Can talk about trends in detail. (P)
Can use hyperbole to emphasise a point (e.g. ‘It’s going to take me years to do this.’). (P)

=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
35
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
70
Can politely bring a discussion back to the main point when the participants have gone off topic. (P)
Can present their ideas with precision and respond to complex lines of argument convincingly. (Ca)
Can ask detailed questions in discussions on contemporary social issues and current affairs. (CSEa)
Can talk about hypothetical events and actions, and their possible consequences. (P)
Can state clearly the limits to a concession. (N2000)
Can give clear presentations highlighting significant points with relevant supporting detail. (Ca)
Can compare and evaluate different ideas using a range of linguistic devices. (P)
Can lead a discussion in an interview, expanding and developing ideas with little help from the interviewer. 
(Ca)
Can compare the advantages and disadvantages of possible approaches and solutions to an issue or 
problem. (Ca)
71
Can use a variety of linking words efficiently to mark clearly the relationships between ideas. (N2000)
Can negotiate different cultural perspectives in a discussion. (Wa)
Can give well-structured, detailed presentations on a wide range of familiar subjects. (Ca)
Can use rhetorical questions in a presentation to keep the audience interested. (P)
72
Can carry out an effective, fluent interview, spontaneously following up on interesting replies. (Ca)
Can ask detailed questions about specific points in a presentation or lecture. (P)
Can talk about personal experiences in detail using linguistically complex language. (P)
Can shift between formal and informal registers as and when required. (P)
Can describe places in detail using linguistically complex language. (P)
73
Can evaluate arguments in a debate or discussion and justify the evaluation. (P)
Can talk in detail about choices that have been significant or life changing using linguistically complex 
language. (P)
Can give detailed technical instructions in their field of specialisation. (P)
Can negotiate a solution to a dispute (e.g. ‘an undeserved traffic ticket’, ‘blame for an accident’). (Ca)
Can use circumlocution and paraphrase to cover gaps in vocabulary and structure. (C)
Can relate their own contribution skilfully to those of other speakers. (C)
Can put forward a smoothly flowing and logical structured argument, highlighting significant points. (P)
Can make a verbal summary to confirm their understanding of a linguistically complex discourse. (P)
74
Can answer questions in a survey using linguistically complex language. (P)
Can make a clear strong argument during a formal discussion. (Ca)
Can exchange complex information on a wide range of matters related to their work. (Ca)
Can give a detailed response to a counter-argument presented by someone else during 
a discussion. (N2007a)
75
Can manage discussions to ensure that they are based on facts and evidence rather than speculation. (P)
Can depart from and return fluently to a prepared speech in order to answer audience questions. (Ca)
Can ask linguistically complex questions in a survey. (P)
Can express attitudes using linguistically complex language. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
36
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
GSE 76–84/C1: Speaking
76
Can answer questions about abstract topics clearly and in detail. (Ca)
Can substitute an equivalent term for a word they can’t recall so smoothly that it isn’t noticeable. 
(N2000a)
Can describe the details of problem-solution relationships using a range of linguistic devices. (P)
Can contribute to group discussions even when speech is fast and colloquial. (Ca)
77
Can justify a point of view using linguistically complex language. (P)
Can rephrase controversial statements into more neutral language. (P)
Can comment on and discuss a linguistically complex text. (P)
78
Can conclude a discursive argument using a range of linguistic devices. (P)
Can give reasons and explanations for their opinions using linguistically complex language. (P)
Can give a detailed account of a complex subject, ending with a clear conclusion. (CJa)
Can summarise clearly and precisely the arguments and event descriptions from a complex text. 
(N2007a)
79
Can participate in linguistically complex discussions about attitudes and opinions. (P)
Can contribute fluently and naturally to a conversation about a complex or abstract topic. (P)
80
Can summarise and comment on the content of a linguistically complex text. (P)
Can participate in a fast-paced conversation with fluent speakers. (Ca)
Can participate in discussions using linguistically complex language to compare, contrast and summarise 
information. (P)
Can reformulate what they want to say during a conversation or discussion using linguistically complex 
language. (N2000a)
Can use a wide range of persuasive techniques in presentations and discussions to encourage others to 
take a course of action. (P)
81
Can join a conversation already in progress between fluent speakers on complex topics. (Ca)
Can manage the participants in a fast-moving discussion to keep it on course. (P)
Can tell a detailed anecdote using linguistically complex language. (P)
83
Can summarise group discussions on a wide range of linguistically complex topics. (P)
84
Can comment in detail on the content of a linguistically complex radio programme or podcast in which 
people describe reactions or opinions. (P)
Can talk about complex financial problems in detail. (P)
GSE 85–90/C2: Speaking
85
Can give detailed advice on a wide range of subjects using linguistically complex language. (P)
86
Can talk about an industry using technical terms and linguistically complex language. (P)
87
Can take part in discussions on political or social issues using linguistically complex language. (P)
Can convey finer shades of meaning precisely by accurately using a wide range of modification devices. 
(N2000a)
88
Can clarify points they are trying to make in an academic discussion, using linguistically complex 
language. (Wa)
90
Can analyse and discuss the persuasiveness of contrasting arguments in a linguistically complex article. 
(P)

=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
37
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
Writing
GSE 10–21/Below A1: Writing
10
Can write the letters of the alphabet in upper and lower case. (P)
Can write their name, address and nationality. (Ca)
12
Can write cardinal numbers from 1 to 20 as words. (CSEa)
18
Can copy familiar words and short phrases about everyday objects and set phrases. (Ca)
20
Can write consistently with joined-up letters. (P)
GSE 22–29/A1: Writing
23
Can complete simple forms with basic personal details. (Ca)
24
Can copy short sentences on everyday subjects (e.g. ‘directions how to get somewhere’). (C)
Can use capital letters appropriately. (P)
Can write a few basic sentences introducing themselves (e.g. ‘name’, ‘age’, ‘where they are from’), given 
prompts or a model. (P)
25
Can write simple sentences about things that they and other people have. (P)
26
Can use basic punctuation (e.g. ‘commas’, ‘full stops’, ‘question marks’). (P)
Can write basic sentences describing everyday objects (e.g. ‘colour’, ‘size’), given a model. (P)
27
Can write simple sentences about personal interests. (P)
Can spell a range of common names. (P)
Can write simple sentences about their family and where they live. (Ca)
Can complete a simple form requiring travel information (e.g. ‘landing card’, ‘customs declaration’). (P)
28
Can write dates using both digits and words. (P)
Can spell a range of common greetings. (P)
Can spell a range of common jobs. (P)
Can write simple sentences about someone’s life and routines. (P)
Can write short, simple notes, emails and postings to friends. (N2000a)
29
Can describe the position of things in a picture using a few simple fixed expressions. (P)
Can write times using both digits and words. (P)
Can write simple sentences about a familiar object. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
38
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
GSE 30–35/A2: Writing
30
Can write simple sentences about what they and other people do. (Ca)
31
Can give personal details in written form in a limited way. (Ca)
Can write a few basic sentences to introduce someone and give basic personal information about them. 
(P)
Can write a standard greeting on a card. (P)
Can use very basic connectors like ‘and’, ‘but’, ‘so’ and ‘then’. (Ca)
Can write a simple description of a room, house or apartment. (P)
Can write simple plans and arrangements on a calendar or in a diary. (CSEa)
Can write simple sentences about what they or other people can or can’t do. (P)
Can write simple sentences about someone’s work and duties. (P)
32
Can write very short, basic directions. (P)
Can write very short, simple sentences about their feelings. (P)
33
Can write simple sentences about personal skills. (P)
Can write short, basic descriptions of everyday activities, given a model. (P)
34
Can write short texts about their likes and dislikes using basic fixed expressions. (P)
Can write basic personal details for a website profile, business card, etc. (P)
Can give an example of something in a very simple text using ‘like’ or ‘for example’. (P)
Can write short descriptive texts (4–6 sentences) on familiar personal topics (e.g. ‘family’, ‘possessions’), 
given a model. (P)
35
Can write a simple text (e.g. ‘an invitation to a party’) containing key information, given a model. (P)
GSE 36–42/A2(+): Writing
36
Can make simple comparisons between people, places or things. (P)
Can ask for personal details in written form in a limited way. (Ca)
Can write short, simple descriptions of people’s physical appearance using basic connectors, given 
prompts or a model. (P)
Can write short texts describing favourite objects, possessions or household pets. (CSEa)
37
Can write a short description of familiar activities, given visual support. (P)
38
Can write short texts about their likes and dislikes, with explanations. (CSEa)
Can write a description of a simple everyday process (e.g. ‘a recipe’). (P)
Can write very simple personal emails/letters expressing thanks and apology. (Ca)
Can write short, simple notes, emails and messages relating to everyday matters. (Ca)
Can write short, basic descriptions of places, people or things. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
39
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
39
Can write a simple email/letter in response to a request for information. (P)
Can write basic instructions with a simple list of points. (P)
Can write basic sentences comparing products, people or places. (P)
Can signal contrast in a simple text with a limited range of language. (P)
Can take a short, simple message if they are able to ask the speaker to repeat and reformulate it. (Ca)
Can write short basic descriptions of past events and activities. (P)
40
Can write a brief summary of their own personal details, e.g. ‘for a business card’. (P)
Can write simple sentences about a future trip or event. (P)
Can write simple texts or emails making arrangements to meet, given a model. (P)
Can write a short, simple email/letter asking for information about an apartment or house to rent. (P)
Can use appropriate openings and endings in simple informal emails. (P)
Can write a simple story or description of an event using basic time expressions. (P)
41
Can write descriptions of everyday personal experiences. (P)
Can write a basic email/letter accepting or declining an invitation. (P)
Can write a basic informal email/letter of invitation with simple, key details. (P)
Can write simple sentences about their educational background and present or past job. (Ca)
Can write about everyday things (e.g. ‘people’, ‘places’, ‘job, study’) in linked sentences. (Ca)
Can complete a simple form asking for medical information. (P)
42
Can rewrite a simple text to correct mistakes. (P)
Can make basic informal suggestions in writing. (P)
Can write simple texts giving key information about their culture (e.g. ‘food’, ‘national holidays’, ‘festivals’). 
(CSEa)
Can write a short description of a trip or event. (P)
GSE 43–50/B1: Writing
43
Can give basic advice in writing using simple language. (P)
44
Can write about personal experiences in a diary or online posting, given a model. (P)
Can write a simple outline for a piece of writing, given a model. (P)
Can clearly signal the end of a simple narrative or description. (P)
Can write a basic description of experiences, feelings and reactions, given a model. (P)
45
Can write an email/letter congratulating someone on something. (P)
Can write a short, simple description of a familiar device or product. (P)
Can make simple, logical paragraph breaks in a longer text. (P)
Can write a story with a simple linear sequence. (Ca)
Can give a simple reason for an action in an informational text, given a model. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
40
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
46
Can write simple informal emails/letters and online postings giving news or opinions. (P)
Can write short, simple essays with basic structure on familiar topics. (Ca)
Can write the concluding sentence or sentences of a basic paragraph, given a model. (P)
Can write a short review of a restaurant, movie, etc. using simple language. (P)
Can write simple instructions on how to use a device or product, given a model. (P)
Can write a basic formal email/letter requesting information. (P)
Can write a notice that clearly conveys information. (P)
Can show a basic direct relationship between a simple problem and a solution. (P)
Can write a description of a future event or activity. (P)
47
Can write descriptions of real or imaginary people. (P)
Can write descriptions of past events, activities, or personal experiences. (P)
Can write an everyday connected text using a set of short elements or facts and building them into a 
sequence. (Ca)
Can write about personal interests in some detail. (P)
48
Can write a basic letter of application with limited supporting details. (P)
Can complete a detailed form requiring travel information (e.g. ‘visa application’). (P)
Can write personal emails/letters giving some details of events, experiences and feelings. (Ca)
49
Can use simple cohesive devices such as repetition in a structured text. (P)
50
Can write personal emails/letters giving advice. (P)
Can write fractions using both digits and words. (P)
Can write a basic summary of a simple text using the original wording and paragraph order. (Ca)
Can write about experiences, feelings and reactions in a simple connected text. (Ca)
GSE 51–58/B1(+): Writing
51
Can write short, simple biographies about real or imaginary people. (Ca)
Can write a basic email/letter of complaint requesting action. (P)
Can write an email/letter sending a message of sympathy. (P)
Can write a simple, structured informational leaflet/brochure, given a model. (P)
Can complete a form requiring educational information (e.g. ‘applying for a course of study’). (P)
Can use limited discourse devices to link sentences smoothly into connected discourse. (Ca)
Can use common connectors to tell a story or describe an event in writing. (Ca)
52
Can summarise the main message from simple diagrams (e.g. ‘graphs’, ‘bar charts’). (P)
Can clearly signal chronological sequence in narrative text. (P)
Can write a simple review of a film, book or TV programme using a limited range of language. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
41
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
53
Can take messages, communicate enquiries and explain problems. (Ca)
Can write simple structured essays, organising basic ideas. (P)
Can write a description of a real or imagined event (e.g. ‘a recent trip’). (C)
Can write emails/letters exchanging information, emphasising the most important point. (Ca)
Can give someone clear, detailed directions on how to get somewhere in a letter, email, or online posting. 
(P)
54
Can write a formal email/letter requesting information. (P)
Can check and correct spelling, punctuation and grammar in simple written texts. (P)
Can complete a form requiring health information. (P)
Can respond to and comment on other people’s personal updates on a social media website. (P)
55
Can post comments on the discussion board of a website. (P)
Can complete a form requiring financial information (e.g. ‘application for a bank account’ or ‘credit 
agreement’). (P)
Can write a formal email/letter accepting or declining an invitation. (P)
Can vary the formality of greetings in emails/letters based on intended recipients. (P)
Can write personal updates on a social media website using an appropriate style. (P)
Can show a simple relationship between a main point and an example in a structured text. (P)
Can write personal emails/letters, reporting recent events in detail. (CJa)
Can take notes of key points during a talk on a familiar topic, if delivered clearly. (Ca)
56
Can introduce a counter-argument in a simple discursive text using ‘however’. (P)
Can write instructions on how to use a device or product. (P)
57
Can summarise factual information within their field of interest. (Ca)
Can write a letter or email of complaint with supporting details. (P)
Can write a description of items for sale on a trading website. (P)
58
Can collate short pieces of information and summarise them for somebody else. (Ca)
Can write comments and complaints about products and services. (P)
Can write instructions on how to look after an object, device or product. (P)
Can write a description of a problem with a product or piece of equipment. (P)
Can write emails/letters responding to personal news and views in detail. (Ca)
GSE 59–66/B2: Writing
59
Can demonstrate understanding of formality and conventions in standard letters. (P)
Can comment on factual information within their field of interest. (Ca)
Can write a detailed description of an object, device or product. (P)
Can support ideas with relevant examples. (P)
Can take notes to record the main points raised during meetings on familiar topics. (CSEa)
Can write detailed descriptions of real or imaginary people. (P)
Can write a formal email/letter of thanks or apology with appropriate conventions. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
42
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
60
Can write a formal email/letter of invitation with appropriate register and conventions. (P)
Can write personal emails/letters giving and commenting on news in detail. (Ca)
Can clearly signal cause and effect relationships in a structured text. (P)
61
Can clearly signal the difference between fact and opinion in structured text. (P)
Can give advice, including reasons. (P)
Can write an extended description of events taking place in their immediate environment. (P)
Can write instructions on how to repair an object, device or product. (P)
Can reformulate an idea in different words to emphasise or explain a point. (P)
Can compare information from different sources. (P)
Can end a discursive argument with a clear conclusion and opinion. (P)
Can write a brief standard report conveying factual information, stating reasons for actions. (Ca)
62
Can write a structured text clearly signalling main points and supporting details. (P)
Can clearly signal problem and solution relationships in structured text. (P)
Can write informal emails or letters using a range of idiomatic phrases. (P)
Can signal additional information in a formal structured text with a range of language. (P)
Can present additional ideas using a range of linking words and phrases. (P)
63
Can write detailed descriptions of real or imaginary places. (P)
64
Can summarise in writing different points of view. (Wa)
Can edit notes or bullet points to make them more concise. (P)
Can correctly attribute information from different sources. (P)
Can write personal emails/letters about abstract or cultural topics (e.g. ‘music’, ‘films’). (Ca)
Can write a concise summary of the main ideas of a longer structured text. (P)
65
Can structure longer texts in clear, logical paragraphs. (P)
Can express news and views effectively in writing and relate to those of others. (C)
Can write a letter of application with appropriate register, conventions and supporting detail. (P)
Can develop a clear written description or narrative with relevant supporting detail and examples. (Ca)
Can give a structured written explanation of a problem. (Ca)
Can systematically evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of various options. (P)
Can write a letter of complaint with appropriate register, structure and conventions. (P)
66
Can make detailed notes of the key action points from feedback. (P)
Can write an accurate summary of an essay or article on a familiar topic. (P)
Can show the relationship between an opinion and a counter-argument in a discursive text. (P)
Can compare and evaluate ideas in a structured and logical text. (P)
Can write engaging headlines or titles to capture a reader’s attention. (P)
Can adopt a level of formality appropriate to the circumstances. (N2000)

=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
43
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
GSE 67–75/B2(+): Writing
67
Can synthesise and evaluate familiar information and arguments from a number of sources. (Ca)
Can write about feelings and the personal significance of experiences in detail. (Ca)
Can write a forceful but polite letter of complaint, including supporting details and a statement of the 
desired outcome. (P)
Can write relevant subheadings to structure longer more complex texts. (P)
Can systematically develop an argument giving the reasons for or against a point of view. (P)
Can write clear, detailed descriptions on a variety of subjects related to their field of interest. (C)
68
Can seek confirmation of information and ideas on abstract and concrete topics. (Ca)
Can write clear and precise emails intended to create rapport and put the addressee at ease. (Ca)
Can respond in writing to other people’s arguments in an appropriate style. (N2007a)
69
Can write a structured review of a film, book or play with some references and examples. (Ca)
Can organise complex written material into numbered sections and sub-sections. (P)
70
Can convey information and ideas on abstract and concrete topics. (Ca)
Can summarise opposing arguments in writing, including supporting evidence. (Wa)
Can express the same idea with a different level of formality appropriate to the audience. (P)
Can represent contrasting points of view in a coherent, well structured text. (Wa)
Can write a structured report analysing advantages and disadvantages of a situation and recommending 
action. (P)
71
Can demonstrate understanding of structure and conventions of different written genres. (Ca)
Can present factual information in an objective way in extended written discourse. (Wa)
72
Can write a detailed, reasoned argument for or against a case. (N2007a)
Can challenge the evidence used to support an argument in a written text. (Wa)
Can check and correct spelling, punctuation and grammar mistakes in long written texts. (P)
73
Can develop an argument with appropriate highlighting of significant points and relevant supporting 
detail. (Ca)
74
Can write a detailed description of a complex process. (P)
Can structure longer complex texts using a range of cohesive devices. (P)
Can edit a text to make the style more neutral or formal. (P)
75
Can prepare questions for a quiz using linguistically complex language. (P)
GSE 76–84/C1: Writing
76
Can write a clear summary of a complex factual text, maintaining its original tone and message. (P)
Can make jokes in writing using words with similar spelling but different meanings. (P)
Can write essays and reports synthesising information from a number of sources. (P)
Can write a letter of application using appropriate conventions and a range of linguistically complex 
language. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
44
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
77
Can write an accurate summary of a complex, discursive text. (P)
Can write a detailed critical review of cultural events (e.g. ‘plays’, ‘films’, ‘concerts’) or literary works. (P)
Can express themselves fluently in writing, adapting the level of formality to the context. (P)
79
Can use linguistic devices such as fronting to emphasise key information in a sentence. (P)
Can precisely select vocabulary for rhetorical purposes. (Wa)
80
Can write summaries and reviews of professional or literary works. (CJa)
Can take effective notes while listening to a linguistically complex audio recording. (P)
81
Can confidently argue a case in writing, specifying needs and objectives precisely and justifying them as 
necessary. (N2007a)
82
Can edit and add to a linguistically complex text to make it clearer or more concise. (P)
Can smoothly switch between a range of writing styles to address specific audiences and topics in a 
personal way. (P)
Can take notes to summarise the key points made during a technical or linguistically complex discussion. 
(P)
84
Can give complex information using appropriate register and conventions. (P)
GSE 85–90/C2: Writing
85
Can create well-structured complex texts with underlying inferred meaning. (Ca)
Can summarise in writing the author’s viewpoints, attitudes or opinions in a linguistically complex text. (P)
Can write linguistically complex and logically structured reports and articles. (CJa)
Can write about complex subjects, underlining the key issues and in a style appropriate to the intended 
reader. (CJa)
90
Can write about literature and poetry in detail, giving reasons for their opinions and interpretation using 
linguistically complex language. (P)

=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
45
GSE Learning Objectives for Adult Learners © Pearson Education Ltd 2022
References
Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System (2012)  
Amplification of The English Language Development Standards KINDERGARTEN–GRADE 12  
(“WIDA ELD Standards”). Retrieved 27.11.2017 from www.wida.us
British Council/EAQUALS (2010) Core Inventory for General English. London, British Council and EAQUALS. 
http://www.teachingenglish.org.uk/article/british-council-eaquals-core-inventory-general-english-0 
Council of Europe (2001) Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning, teaching, 
assessment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Council of Europe (2009) Relating Language Examinations to the Common European Framework of 
Reference for Languages: Learning, Teaching, Assessment (CEFR):  
A Manual. Strasbourg: Council of Europe; Language Policy Division.  
http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/linguistic/Source/ManualRevision-proofread-FINAL_en.doc.
North, B. (2000) The Development of a Common Framework Scale of Language Proficiency.  
New York: Peter Lang.
North, B. (Ed) (2007) Expanded set of C1 and C2 descriptors. Strasbourg: Council of Europe; Language 
Policy Division. http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/education/elp/elp-reg/Source/Key_reference/
C1C2descriptors_EN.pdf
The Society for Testing English Proficiency Inc. (2008) The Eiken Can-do List: English Translation Retrieved 
13.04.2017 from www.eiken.or.jp/eiken/exam/cando/pdf/Eiken_CandoList_translation.pdf
Tokyo University of Foreign Studies Tonolab. (2012). CEFR-J Version 1. Retrieved from http://www.tufs.ac.jp/
ts/personal/tonolab/cefr-j/english/index-e.html
Trim, J. (2009) Breakthrough. Strasbourg, Council of Europe. Available on www.ealta.eu.org

=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
Help your learners unlock their  
full potential with personalised  
learning paths created using the  
Global Scale of English Teacher Toolkit. 
The free online tool includes:
 
^ Searchable databases of learning 
objectives, vocabulary and grammar
 
^ Downloadable search results  
for improved reporting
 
^ Text analyzer to measure  
reading difficulty
Access the GSE Teacher Toolkit and  
learn more about the Global Scale of 
English at pearsonenglish.com/gse.
All you need to 
personalise learning:
The GSE Teacher Toolkit
